---
title: Policies concerning non-human samples
description: Inclusive of genetically Modified Organisms, microorganisms, nucleic acids, proteins and cultures
---

India recognised the need to maintain separate guidelines for shipping biological materials way back in 1989 (just three years after US passed the Coordinated Framework for the Regulation of Biotechnology), where it stipulated the “Rules for the Manufacture, Use, Import, Export and Storage of Hazardous Microorganisms/Genetically Engineered Organisms or Cells” Act. This act was passed in “exercise of the powers conferred by the Environment Protection Act, 1986” to the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of India (GoI) and stands applicable to “manufacture, import and storage of micro-organisms and gene-technological products”. Noteworthy, this act defines the contextual use of the following terms - biotechnology, cell hybridization, gene technology, genetic engineering and microorganisms, thus spanning the spectrum of non-human biological materials that could be handled and shipped. It is to be noted that the above act remains applicable in cases of domestic sale, export, import, indigineous production, packaging, and storage of the non-human biological samples such as Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs), microorganisms, nucleic acid, proteins and cultures.

The act assigns authorities with distinct and differential responsibilities, thereby decentralising power from the apex regulatory body which is the DBT for non-human samples handling to the Institutional Biosafety Committee (IBSC) present in every biological research-undertaking institution dealing with human and non-human biological samples across India. Intermediate bio-safety regulatory bodies such as RBAC, GEAC, RCGM are prescribed to review the latest developments in each of the fields in biology and (i) recommend guidelines and regulations in that space to the Department of Biotechnology (DBT), (ii) approve activities involving the manufacture and use considering environmental and health hazards and (iii) inspect, investigate and take punitive action in case of violence of the stipulated provisions. Fig. 1 shows the hierarchy of competent authoritative bodies for non-human sample handling in India, as defined by the 1989 Act. 

RCGM, in its capacity as the intermediate working body, has the mandate to bring out manuals of guidelines specifying procedure for regulatory processes with respect to activities involving GMOs for research use, had approved simplification of the procedures and guidelines on shipment of non-human samples in 2015 (dated 22.09.2015) by providing additional authorization to IBSCs for approving “exchange, import and export of regulated biological materials up to prescribed quantities”.  Under this simplification, exchange/import/export of polynucleotides (of natural or synthetic or recombinant origin), proteins (including pure plant protein), non-living plant material, GE microorganisms and cell lines that could be handled at BL 1 containment and model organisms were clearly mentioned along with the relevant guidelines based on quantities involved for the individual research purpose. In 2020 (dated 17.01.2020), RCGM simplified the above guidelines further to “facilitate conduct of preclinical and safety studies and the product development at GMP facilities for biological drug development” and provided extended authority to IBSCs in this regard. 

In 2017, RCGM, recognising the advancements made in the field of Recombinant DNA technology, published a guideline titled Regulations and Guidelines for Recombinant DNA Research and Biocontainment. This guideline was an extension and consolidation of the earlier guidelines concerning recombinant DNA technology, namely - Recombinant DNA Safety Guidelines, 1990; Revised Guidelines for Safety in Biotechnology, 1994; Revised Guidelines for Research in Transgenic plants. This guideline covers regulation of biosafety with regards to handling and storing microorganisms, animals, plants, insects and microorganisms during import/export, research, disposal, and emergency. The regulatory aspect involved both precise guidelines in terms of protocols and infrastructural measures that needed to be taken by the institutes. The guideline stipulates the same approval agencies for the movement of GE organisms, non-GE hazardous microorganisms and products and the vectors of diseases alike the 1989 Act. 

However, the 2017 Regulations for Recombinant DNA research sheds extensive light on the shipment protocols to be followed, in accordance with Section 18 of The Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 No. 22. For instance, import of GM plants and planting materials has been stated to require a permit to be issued by the Director, National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources, New Delhi (NBPGR) of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR). The permit is then issued subject to the issue of import authorization letter by the RCGM, where it is requisite to clearly specify the scope of the import and required safety measures to be adopted during R&D work. The import consignment would then enter through the New Delhi Airport where customs shall verify the documents and hand it over to NBPGR. NBPGR then would verify the contents and the accompanying documents (Import permit, Phytosanitary Certificate, Supplier Declaration that the GM material does not contain any embryogenesis deactivator gene). NBPGR is also tasked to test for the absence of diseases, pests and other undesirable material, absence of embryogenesis deactivator gene and for the presence of the declared transgene. Subject to satisfactory outcome of the tests, NBPGR would then hand over the consignment to the importer. Parts of the material (5% or 5 to 50 seeds whichever is less) will be kept at NBPGR in a double lock system in the presence of the importer, which will act as source material in case of any legal dispute.

Concerning export of non-human samples, especially that of GM plants and planting material, besides being regulated by the Environment Protection Act, 1986 and The Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992, attracts the provisions of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 which states the access and use of biological resources in India. It stipulates the Advance Informed Agreement procedure of the Cartagena Protocol to be followed that applies to the first intentional transboundary movement of LMOs for intentional introduction into the environment of the party of import. 